namaste and welcome to yoga for humanity
by seva international
my name is raju datla and i'm a
volunteer of seva international
seva is a non-profit community service
organization that was started in
2003 with a threefold mission of
promoting volunteerism aiding local
communities and serving humanity in
distress seva provides a platform for
people from all walks of life to join
hands and volunteer
we specialize in disaster relief and
rehabilitation
our development programs focus on health
and wellness refugee welfare human
empowerment and education
seva has a presence in 20 countries
around the world and hundreds of seva
volunteers spend thousands of hours
annually serving the needy in their
local communities
in today's yoga for humanity session
which is part of seva's flagship family
services project samitha apte a
certified yoga therapist will guide the
group through a
series of breathing practices that will
help normalize the breathing rate
loosening exercises to loosen the joints
in the body surya namaskar or sun
salutation which brings general
flexibility to the body and yogasana's
and pranayama breathing techniques there
are many benefits in practicing yoga on
a daily basis however if you have any
ailments balancing problems or if you
experience any pain or feel
lightheadedness then we advise you not
to follow these practices and listen to
your body
seva offers this program for free all
over massachusetts so if you or your
friends would like to have a session at
your home or your place of work please
reach out to us at seva usa.org
thank you and i hope you like this
program
we start with the prayer
um
the meaning of the prayer is
may god protect us both
the teacher and the student
may god nourish us both
may we work together with the energy and
vigor
may our study be enlightened and not
rise to hostility
om peace peace
peace
let us begin with the practices
stand up
we are going to start with the
breathing practices
in breathing practices first we will be
doing hands in and out breathing
so take your hands parallel to the
shoulder in the front
inhale
open the arms
exhale
close them
inhale
exhale
and the last round inhale open
close and gently
release now we will be doing hand
stretch breathing interlock the fingers
near your chest
inhale
stretch your arms
exhale
inhale
riser
exhale
down
inhale
and exhale
now 135 degree inhale
rise up
exhale
down when you come down make sure the
shoulder goes back
inhale
up
exhale
down now 180 degrees inhale up
down
inhale up
exhale
now
ankle stretch breathing in ankle stretch
breathing we will be rising up with our
hands
now get on your toes slowly
rise up as tall as firm as you can
breathe
and exhale
release
inhale up
exhale
down
inhale up
exhale
down
now we are going to do tiger breathing
so anytime if you feel pain
lightheadedness you should not do these
practices
you can learn the practices but you
should not do them
you should always have the instructor
who you will be doing it with
inhale
up
head goes up back goes in
exhale
head goes down back comes up
inhale up
exhale
down
always listen to the body inhale up
exhale
down the breathing practices that we did
is to normalize the breathing
now we will be doing some loosening
practices
so let us start with toe jogging hands
near the chest
and jog on the toes
if you want to get off your mat that
will be fine
now we will be doing forward jogging
backward jogging
sideward jogging
and now we will be doing mukha dhoti
so rest on your knees your hands rest on
your knees inhale from the nostril
and exhale
make a balloon
of your mouth and exhale inhale
and exhale
one more time in here
and
exhale
now we will be doing side bending
little bit of distance in both your legs
hands on the side
now gently go as much down as you
possibly can and connect it to the knees
look up
exhale
and come back
inhale
touch the knee
exhale
come back
inhale rise up
exhale
we'll be doing
twisting
your hands by the side of the shoulder
gently
moving your waist and go back
and look back inhale
come back straight exhale
inhale
and exhale
the last one inhale
and
come back straight
now we'll be doing sun salutation which
will prepare us for the asada practices
so we begin with the prayer
om
satya
um
let us begin with the practice
in here
backward bending
asana
exhale
forward bending
inhale left leg back
look up
equestrian pose
exhale
left leg back
tulasana that is
plank pose
get on your knees while inhaling come
back
and exhaling get into shankarsana child
pose
inhale come up
and while exhaling
go into such tangana mascara now flat
pose
your knees
toes hands chest and forehead touching
the ground
inhale cobra
exhale
mountain varvatasana
inhale get on your knees and while
exhaling get under child pose
inhale
left leg in the front
exhale
right leg in the front
inhale backward bending
exhale
now those who have back pain they should
not do
forward bending and backward bending
they should avoid this
now one more round namaskar mudra
inhale
backward bending
exhale
front bending
inhale
right leg back look up
exhale
left leg back
blank pose
get on the knees
inhale
and while exhaling get into the child
pose
rise up on your hands
inhale and while exhaling
get into flight pose
inhale cobra
exhale
mountain
heel stretching to the ground
inhale get on the knees while exhaling
touch your head to the ground shankars
and child pose
inhale
right leg in the front
equestrian pose exhale
forward bending
inhale backward bending
exhale namaste
now we will be doing trikonasana that is
uh triangle pose little bit of distance
in both your legs
we can use the block in this one if you
cannot
reach up to the toes you can always use
the block and reach up to the block
always listen to the body you can learn
the practices but you should not do it
if you are not comfortable
hands by the side of the shoulder
so from the right hand we are going to
either connect to the right toes or
right knees depending upon your body
flexibility or you can reach up to the
block whatever you you feel is
comfortable so
go
down and reach to the toes
the alternative position is reach to the
block
slowly come up
and release
now in here
hands palette to the shoulder now take
your block on the another side
if you want to use it and from the left
hand side we are going to connect it to
the toes
if that is not possible you can connect
it to the
on the block
slowly come up
and release
now the twisted triangle
again
hands by the side of the shoulder from
the left hand we are going to connect it
to the right toes or the block
so
get on the left side
look up breathe
slowly come up
and release
again hands by the side of the shoulder
from the right hand we are going to
connect
left toes look up
breathe
and rise up
slowly
release
now we are going to be on our
chairs actually on our abdomen
so lie down
in the front
bend in your knees
if you can hold your ankles
and stretch
breathe always hold the posture but
never hold the breath always breathe in
and out
and slowly release the stretch
release your legs and relax
now we are going on the back
slowly take your both the legs near your
buttocks
connect your hand to the ankles
and lift your waist up
inhale exhale
and
release
always listen to your body should not
try something that you cannot do
now we are getting into the
one more posture
that is
when releasing posture take left leg
near your
abdomen and hold it
breathe
and release
take right leg near your abdomen
hold the leg breathe
and release
take both the legs
near your abdomen
now if you do not have back pain or neck
pen
then try to connect your head to the
knees
and breathe
and release
release your legs
now we will be doing the relaxation
lie down in shavasana
relax the entire body from
toes to head
we are going to chant a u and m together
and feel the vibrations throughout the
body
inhale
uh
now next two minutes we are going to
observe the silence
feel the peace within us
and relax the entire body
release the stress
gently turn on your left
hand below the head
i mean hand below the head
with the other hand
lift the body
and slowly come up
in the sitting position
now we will be doing
breathing that is pranayama
city right
your thumb is connected to the index
finger we will be doing abdominal
breathing as you inhale abdomen bulges
up
as you exhale
things down
inhale up
exhale
now we will be doing alternate nostril
breathing we are going to form the nasi
kamudra for the right hand
close your index finger and the middle
finger and we are going to use our
thumb and the ring finger
so with your right hand close your right
nostril and exhale from the left
inhale left
exhale right
inhale right
exhale
left and release your hand
feel the peace within you
now we will going to perform the last
pranayama that is brahmari
the sound of a honey bee
connect your tongue to the palate
inhalation and exhalation from the
nostril while in exhaling we are going
to make the sound n
so inhale
inhale
we will be chanting the closing prayer
hans in the namaskar mudra
om
bhavantu sukhi naha
a
may all feel happy
may all be free from illness
may all see what is auspicious
may no one suffer
oh
peace peace
namaste
hello again
now that you have watched the group
demonstrate different breathing
techniques and yoga postures let me
explain some of the benefits
the sun salutation which was initially
done has two great benefits
first it can be a great workout for the
whole body
stretching flexing and toning the
muscles and an excellent weight loss
exercise
second it offers numerous health
benefits beyond the physical level like
relaxing the mind it's a good idea to do
sun salutation early morning at sunrise
with an empty stomach
trikonasana the triangle pose helps in
preventing flat foot strengthens the
calf muscle and corrects the curvature
of one's back
but people who have undergone recent
abdominal surgery or have a slip disc or
sciatica problem should avoid this
posture
dhanurasana the bow posture simulates
the organs of the abdomen and neck and
strengthens the back muscle
setupandasana
improves digestion and has therapeutic
benefits
for people suffering from asthma and
blood pressure
if you are a beginner just getting
started with yoga the thing to keep in
mind is that everybody's body is
different
do only as much as you can or your body
can take
before doing any yoga practice you
should always consult your doctor before
practicing
thank you for watching
namaste
you